okay we are on the record it is
now
604 the June 11th meeting of the charter
revision commission is now in session we
have in attendance Carol Lee Patricia
Billings jod gross Karen Mador Jeff
Maguire and Adrien Mandeville is absent
uh doesn't look like we have any members
of the public public present right now
let me just bring up the
uh agenda to make sure that I don't miss
anything here we have called to order um
the second item will be public speak we
have no members of the general public I
just say something during public speak
though yeah I wanted to say if if there
are any members of the commission who
want to speak as individuals Now's the
Time so Carol go ahead I I would just
like to suggest that section 10008
review an amendment of the charter that
we just add a single line to that that
states if upon review amendments to the
Charter are deemed necessary the board
of Selectmen shall appoint a charter
revision commission giving this
commission a minimum of 12 months
complete their charge this way rather
than having these Charter review visions
that are you know expected to be done in
three to six weeks that it's the law of
the town of Andover I mean we need more
time to honestly
review our you know get our charge and
then
review what charge we are
given do a good job at the chart of
revision it's an interesting notion open
the floor to discussion on
this anyone have any thoughts yeah I
think time is an interesting thing um
and so you know the real question is do
you want to bite off one or two things
in three to four months or do you want
to try to do multiple things a lot of
things so I think with a short time
period um um I think we just you know as
a board without that provision in there
or as a commission sorry whatever we are
committee we just need to recognize that
we can do what we can do in a short
period of time and have that level of
discussion so I'm I'm inclined not to
put that type of requirement in but
because it kind of blocks Us in to
saying you can only do it with 12 months
um because I think I think we're able to
get some substantial improvements
changes even in a three to four month
period I'm not saying that we can't
complete it in three months Jody but I'm
just saying we know that every November
there is going to be an election whether
it be
municipal gorial or presidential every
November there will be an election
so you have 12 months notice for that
I'm not saying that the charter revision
couldn't be assigned in January or in
December of one year completed the end
of January the following year if there
are smaller things to be done but a
couple of the things that we were given
are not smaller things to look into
they're major things they're major
changes for our form of government and
you know if we're if not only the
charter revision commission but the
general public has 12 months notice too
that this Charter revision is going to
take place and these are the items that
the board of Selectmen are suggesting
that
we given that the charge well the
Implement in the charge nomally comes
from the board of Selectmen and we have
a select person here on our commission
Jeff do you have any thoughts on sure
minimum me I was on mute I I guess Carol
the only issue I would have is um I
don't think there's a limitation from
the board of Selectmen to the number of
times it's in panels a charter committee
is that
accurate correct all right so we're
going to limit the board future board of
selectman to only allowing or having to
impanel a charter revision commission
and it has to go 12 months whereas we
could finish this Charter revision
commission and the board of Select could
impanel another
one to move forward and and even further
than that
we wouldn't have to wait till the
election I know what I was attempting to
do Carolyn I do understand you know
where you're coming from but I don't
necessarily know that setting a
limitation on either the number of times
you can impanel a charter revision
commission or the timing of that Charter
revision commission is is a positive I
don't I don't see it as you have to
impanel them and give them a year to do
it I totally understand if if I sat
there and said to you
um tear the entire Charter apart and do
the whole thing yeah you'd need a year
to really go through Section by section
word by word to make sure you're correct
and that you're getting to where you
want to be um even my issue of the Town
Council it's a change of government it's
not that drastic of a change if you
think it through from a common sense
perspective it's a change yes no one
likes it but I don't necessarily know
that 12
months uh
I I just think it's another limiting
factor yeah 12 months seems a lot to me
also I would I I think the idea that
there should be some minimum length of
time that the charter commission has to
work with before it comes up against a
hard deadline um I mean we have these
hard deadlines because things have to
get on the ballot
um and they do have to get on the ballot
there could also a special referendum
vote for that um the problem is we have
to have certain number turn out for that
referendum so it doesn't necessarily
have to go on a November ballot either
could have it as a referendum vote so
and having it as a referendum would be
more expensive though also than just
having it at the same time as a general
election right rather than have it as a
question on the
during the general election that is
correct it is an additional couple
thousand dollars to the town have that
special ref and you know Carol one thing
that I would sit there and I wouldn't
mind if we sat there and found a way to
put this into the charter is that any
Charter revisions need to get on a
November
ballot and the reason and and just so
everybody here understands what I was
trying to do is
um I was trying to get a charter
revision on the presidential ballot
because it will be the most attended
election that we have in the four-year
cycle and so it was to give the most
opportunity for the majority of the
people that don't participate in
government to have a say on something
that I believe is important I mean we're
not going to get done what I wanted to
get done in this Charter revision
commission but we are going to get done
a lot of good things
so I don't
necessarily I I would tell you the only
way to do a charter Revision in my mind
is to put it on a November ballot and
cycle it to the presidential election
and up Carol I apologize I was
late so well while we've got this idea
out I mean suppose we say no we're not
gonna ever go to a a special referendum
it has to be on a general election and
there has to be a minimum three months
does that sound workable does that sound
like it has negatives associated with it
why limit us at all why limit the why
handcuff the I would try to say a
minimum of six months just because of
the statute directed date we have to
have the public hearing we have to have
our meetings we have to have final
public hearing at the end so if we I
just don't want to see us make a rush
decision on something
because we have deadlines that are
statutory deadlines and we don't have a
way to change I just rather than a thre
monmon
block
that's kind of tough really go out and
do the
research I think if we can't do the 12
months I I I will totally agree with the
six months because you do need time if
you don't need the full six months you
don't need it but at least you have the
six months
but we're getting a minimum of six
months notice is all I'm saying to enact
the charter revision Commission because
the board of Selectmen you know it says
they shall review or cause to be review
from time to time as they be necessary
so their hands aren't tied as far as
doing that but at least give that
minimum of six months so we can do our
job correctly
well from my perspective it sounds like
we have a whole lot of different
thoughts on this um and Ju Just as a
digression something that's that's
become obvious to me the last couple of
of meetings and so I ask for help
whenever it it seems obvious when things
uh require a uh a a motion and a vote to
proceed um and it seems like this is one
of them though um whether or not we
proceed on this or whether we just just
move on with the things that are uh that
are on our plate already yeah you're
you're in public comment still and we're
all just commenting as public folks when
you want to come out and if there's
someone on this committee that wants to
make a motion um and be recognized by
the chair Robert's Rules of
parliamentary procedure allow that to
happen or we could do that under item
four we could do it under item four also
okay I mean it just so you know
we're all aware this Charter revision
commission can do anything that it wants
so Carol is not out of line to sit there
and attempt to do this I mean listen I
read this and and there's I read the
charter again and there's typos in our
Charter I would like to correct the
typos in the charter so it's it's it's a
motion that eventually I'll make will we
agree to just like not say hoarde let's
say Bor let's get get rid of dashes and
and so
Carol anything that anybody on this
panel you want to do something you want
to attempt to do something if it's
common sense and it and it and it you
know you you got to put it up I mean
there's no reason the reason I put up
the Town Council is to me it's Common
Sense everybody doesn't AG have to agree
with me that's democracy that's how we
work so let's move on so come out of
public speak and let's just make motions
and talk about the items that are out
there and let's see how quickly we can
get all the information to the town
attorney so he can draft something and
we can sit there and keep
reviewing thank you Jeff all right let's
then come out of public speak unless
anyone has any other items that they
want to bring to the floor theual
citizens who's the
Samsung I'm assuming that
phone Samsung sm1 146 U yeah with that
individual like to make comment or
participate or who are they really so we
can understand yeah well we need to know
for the
record member of the public who's
calling in on a cell phone can you
please identify yourself unmute and
identify okay well just let's keep muted
let's go okay so move on to item three
approval of the
minutes all
right excuse me I would like to make a
motion to approve the minutes for the
public hearing and our Three Special
meetings as written
I'll second that motion Karen got
it okay so moved by Carol seconded by
Karen has everyone had time to examine
these prior
to this meeting we all in a position to
be able to vote
intelligently I know I am let's go any
further
discussion all those in favor I I I any
opposed 6 the minutes are
approved all right so item four
discussion and possible action on any
Charter review issue
so when we last left
this um dollar amounts was approved
early voting dates of Elections were
approved um we had continued until this
week uh referendum voting to align the
Board of Education Carol that
was your item unmute
yourself there you go what do you have
for
us get myself organized I would was not
expecting to be
firsts I am sorry I'll tell you what you
can get your get your stuff together
we'll um let's just talk about a few of
these other things while you're
organized so okay thank you number five
the town clerk position was Adrien he's
not with us right now so we're gonna
have to defer that along with number 10
the supplemental appropriation which
would trigger a referendum vote that was
also a
Adrian um Jeff would you like to talk
about your ordinance procedures I saw
that you circulated uh a nice document
so let us know your thoughts okay
so on the ordinance issue um the main
issue is we have some confusion in the
current process from a minor ordinance
to um a major ordinance and how they
would go through and flow through the
current process within the charter so
the issue from my standpoint would be to
uh there's no
more uh there would be no more major or
minor there would only be ordinances and
the ordinances would be able to
be uh created and
approved through the process by the
board of
Selectmen and um the sections that I
identif ified that you would have to
adjust where it be definition Section
105 um basically eliminating the
ordinance the minor ordinance
information and saying that the current
all the ordinances that are currently in
place are in effect and then uh you
would move on to 301 in the general and
you would sit there and make some
language and some terminology about the
legislative authority of the Town shall
be shared by the board of Selectmen of
the town meeting the town meeting shall
have final Authority for final approval
of those actions of the town and
thereafter Hereafter enumerated in
section 304
304 relates to the special Town meetings
called and so it would then go on to sit
there and say the board of Selectmen
shall have legislative Authority for all
matters not specifically enumerated
Hereafter in section 304 including but
not limited to the authority to approve
enact repeal and modify all ordinances
after a public hearing
and also those Powers enumerated section
402 which I'll get to in the future and
also those Powers formally assigned to
the town meeting per section uh 403d of
this Charter so in section 403 under the
special Town meetings it's the to
meeting would remain in effect all
Financial issues everything else related
to uh what we've been dealing with in
the past and this section uh we would
sit there and strike the 403d and then
the 403 J uh which relate to uh
ordinance and ordinance approvals and
it's the same thing under petition Town
meetings to remove 304d and 304j so if
you go in and you read those um and why
don't we do that if you guys don't
mind4 D so I highlighted what I needed
to deal with um
D 304d is the creation consolidation
modification and abolition of a
permanent board commission department or
agency not otherwise provided for in
this Charter however
provided in this Charter provided
however any newly created board
department or agency of commission shall
come under the provisions contained in
this Charter so what I'm saying here is
this section is eliminating the need to
go to uh a special town meeting if the
board selectman determines that they
want to create a board so let's sit
there and say a board that is currently
not operating that's in the charter um
uh you know and we wouldn't we wouldn't
do it we really should uh Beef It Up is
there's an
ordinance uh committee that's in there
but the every once in a while while I've
been on the board of Select them we've
created a
um
a boards and so this is if you wanted to
create a permanent board you just don't
have to go to town meeting to do this um
we probably um it's not something that I
think you would want to go to town
meeting it's not Financial um I don't
think it has any significant U need to
sit there and deal with that and then
the other item that we're talking about
is
304j um the approval repeal or
modification of any Town ordinance when
petition pursuant to the provisions of
section 305 the charter has amended
providing set Ord are not inconsistent
with any other provisions of this
Charter or with the Connecticut General
statute so those are the two items that
would be moved from town meeting to the
board of
Selectmen and the other items that we
would sit there and deal with related to
this is you would get to the board of
Selectmen in the general Powers which is
402 just tells the board so it says
minor currently and it's now go it would
now say to an act amend or repeal
ordinances providing they are not
inconsistent with this Charter and not
legally inconsistent with the general
statutes of the state of
Connecticut uh also under
whoops sorry about that um uh 402b to
enact ordinances uh creating
consolidating modifying or abolishing
agencies commissions boards and other
authorities not otherwise provided for
in this Charter um and then you would
move move on to public hearing and this
section shall remain intact except the
phrase not covered by section 105h shall
be deleted and we would change the
waiting period from 21 days to replace
with 45 days now the one thing that I
don't have here and it's something that
I need to uh we talked about three
things that I've covered in here the
three things were um U timing
we talked about
timing um to give uh a minimum time for
people to get the one thing that I don't
have here is so the public hearing is in
here so the three things we had is
public hearing a 45 day review period
and then we were talking about the
percentage of of people needed to
petition to move this to um a referendum
and in our Charter after my read today
was we don't have anything that sits
there and Carol unless you're going to
tell me I missed it uh a way for the
public to petition to get to something
to referendum there's the information
for petitioning to move to town meeting
but that's the whole point of this is to
try to minimize uh the things that have
to go to town meeting um I would rather
it go to a referendum and have it be on
the voting cycle um a normal voting
cycle as opposed even a special election
um and I to to frame this in
understanding we uh we just had Jeff
Murray we've had a problem at the town
at the uh at the new field
um and of dogs um residents bringing
dogs down to the park and having the
dogs at the park and we've had this
discussion our boorder of Select meeting
probably 15 times like what to do with
people who are down at the the town
fields and at their dogs uh defecating
on the field and
um to pass that ordinance and find those
people we have to go the board of Select
would have to go to town meeting to get
this passed this is the this is what
this is this is not a you know we need
this overall craziness to sit there and
dictate to the Town certain things but
there are things that don't need to go
to town meeting that are common sense
that should get approved so and that one
is one of them so we just it was just
brought up by one of the other Selectmen
to potentially create an ordinance and
we had the discussion is it a minor or a
major ordinance
so those are those are the items that's
what I would I would recommend we
provide to the town attorney to sit
there and determine whether it's good or
bad or if if it needs to be changed but
those are the things that I'd like to
see put in
place the only thing because we do not
have in our Charter petition process so
hebr if you look at their Charter
section 405 there's a power of overrule
ordinances adopted by the board of
Selectmen it clearly spells out what a
resident would do if they did not agree
with that ordinance um it says that
petition is filed within 20 days after
the final action and 2% of the electors
of the town would have to sign that
petition in order to force that
ordinance to potentially be overturned
at a
reference I have no problem with that I
agree with that I just did not have the
wording when I wrote it up today and I
can send this over to you if you want I
mean clear here
and have no problem stealing from Hein
or anybody else no because Charter is
hein's Charter the one that we adopted
in 1999 was exactly hein's Charter word
for word including the section numbers
the only things that were changed were
modified to fit the town of
and give me if you guys don't mind I
have to go run and do one thing that's
why my alarm went off so give me one
second I'll be right
back all right well while Jeff is doing
that
thing
um told us how long he was gonna be gone
for can we can um when I when I heard
what you described it sounded similar to
section
305a and then it talks about going to
referendum 2% going to referendum is
that different than what you were just
describing
[Music]
that's sort of petitioning for town
meeting but then there's a note there
that talks about going to referendum
from the town
meeting and what what kind of struck me
a bit on based on je what Jeff had he
was striking
304j which kind of referenced this 305
so I I didn't quite I I wasn't following
it in that regard so I'm I'm just trying
to understand 305a what is that really
saying to us so it's saying
that or petition town meeting concerning
so it's
forcing something to go to a petitioned
town meeting yeah this would just force
it to go to a referendum vote
Jody the the issue would be not to have
Town meetings unnecessarily if we could
at all possibly avoid it I mean I I
always look at Town meetings it's
Financial everybody in this town should
have the rights to go and financially
deal with anything in town um I have no
problem with that um some of the other
things are just you know more clerical
more
operational and and you're going to a
town meeting to explain why you want to
have an ordinance for dogs on the field
that's kind of my my mental side it's
always been my mental side of it it's
like I got to go I and we've held off
doing a lot of
ordinances um and pushing for the town
meetings because you know we've had them
and we're going well why do we want to
spend the money to have a town meeting
and I know Carol will say two grand but
two grand is two grand so but don't you
aggregate those like we do the last time
we aggregated them I mean that's why
this last town meeting had like seven
items on the town meeting because we aad
them so your your intent is really to
try to make government a bit more
efficient you're trying to give more
latitude to
the five Board of Selectmen that that
3,200 people elected to
enact
ordinances but I guess I just as a lay
person I'm just trying to understand
Where's the Line like could you I don't
know you know $1,000 a
day ordinance through the board of
Selectmen for people who have white
mailboxes I mean it sounds crazy but I'm
just trying to understand is there how
do you how do you make differentiation I
would tell you I would tell you the
answer is probably yes if I could
convince the members of the board to do
it but that's not how it works I mean
you you you know we all know it's it's
not going to
first thing would be if I put in if we
put in something that was objectional to
the town residents uh I I would hope and
I probably would be there to probably
try to go and overturn or move something
to uh to a referendum and get it
overturned
um okay so the recourse for the town
let's just say there's three crazy
people on our Board of Selectmen for
whatever reason and they do something
the course for the town you're saying is
is what bring them to bring it to
referendum and get it overturned yeah
and then vote them out you know hey let
me ask let me ask a question uh looking
looking to how the state does things for
guidance and forgive me my you know
forgetting my my basic Civics so at the
state level here in Connecticut laws can
get generally get passed two ways they
can get passed by the legislature
somebody somebody brings something to
the floor of the legislature they de
debate it they amend it they vote it in
and a law gets passed that way but laws
can also get passed through public vote
through
referendum what makes things go one way
or another because you know at the Town
level we're talking about being able to
make it through the elected legislative
body versus through a direct vote and
that's that's mirrored at the state
level so what triggers when something is
done one way versus the other at the
state
level well first of all I'm not aware
that in the state of Connecticut you can
put something on a ballot measure and
get it
passed um I know in California you can I
know in other states you can but I don't
think in Connecticut you can do that but
um this is where there's a confusion
within our Charter our Charter because
there's the minor ordinance and you know
everything else like what falls into a
minor ordinance what falls into what's
considered a major ordinance and what so
the issue ends up being it's an
ordinance
you elected the board of Selectmen to
sit there and be your your
representatives allow them to pass
ordinances I'm just telling you I can't
I could sit there and see Jody's point
before three crazy people get on the
board and put in an ordinance that's
problematic that's true I could see it
but so so I think that maybe that was
Carol's point about what's say say it
happens so what's the sort of safety for
the town how do we bring it to
referendum is that in the charter no
that was what Carol was talking that's
what Carol was saying we need something
like Hein has where people could get in
an uproar and bring it for referendum
yeah it ABS that absolutely has to be
that was something we discussed good we
discussed um so the points I'm
addressing and what I brought forth um
are the points up until the way that we
go about and and push something to a
referendum and challenge it so Carol has
that language from Hein we should
provide that I'm I'm all in agreement
it's got to be in there except we don't
have it in our current Charter because
the only thing that we petition to is
the town meeting and what I'm saying is
we need to try to stop petitioning it to
the town meeting and petition it to a
referendum um to to move on and
currently for ordinances it because the
legislative body is the people people of
the town of and elor that is why we have
to bring ordinances to town meeting
whether it be a special town meeting
usually it is a special town it's always
a special town meeting right the only
town meeting that's scheduled is the
budget town meeting but you know special
town meeting Jeff I I like this because
I like the streamlined component of it
but it gives me a little bit of
heartburn because it kind of brings up
the notion of the relative strength and
authority of the town meeting versus the
Board of Selectmen who gets the the
power to do what where are where are the
limits on that Authority and and that
still stays a little bit vague in my
mind I because it's the legislative
power that's given to the people and now
we're we're taking it away even though
we're providing them with a petition
process that's clearly spelled out you
just need to get a petition with about
40 people's signature on it and we are
forcing this to the referendum there's
no
if the are buts about it um but still
like what Bob is saying we are taking
the authority away from the legislative
body uses of the well what we're doing
is we're taking it away from the
potential 40 people that attend a town
meeting and giving it to all of the
people who come and vote and and that's
what you're doing you're not you're not
making it a uh you know you're not
you're you're sitting there with the the
town meeting and first of all you're
making you're making it much more easy
to
to to tackle problems at the board of
selectman level and very quickly and
very easily um that's one and then what
you're doing is you're providing the
town with the opportunity to vote on
something if they choose to and and I
would sit there and say any ordinance
even one that's on the books could be
petitioned I I don't want to limit this
to just the newest of ordinances every
ordinance at any time should be able to
be petitioned if it's if it's deemed not
worthy by a group of residents but what
I'm trying to get to is it just like the
charter
revision going here at this time to try
to get on the presidential election it's
try to get the most participation within
town and and that's what I'm driving at
like you could put up a an ordinance and
you get 45 people at a town meeting and
they're dict
everything that happens for the other
you know 27 2500 voting residents of the
Town whereas you're at a an election or
at a referendum you're giving them all
they don't all show I mean Carol what do
we average 40 50 60% of the people come
to
vote that but you could have the same 45
people show up at the
referendum so I hear what Bob is saying
because the legislative body whether
it's for
or 5050 or 76 like our last town were
taking their voice away and I know that
you're an elected Board of five but
we're giving it to a board of five then
someone has to motivated to go out and
collect 40
signatur for s for referendum and we may
still only have the same 45 people show
up at the referendum to vote
well not if the referendums are always
dictated on
November you know and and you're saying
rather than have a referendum so if you
enact an ordinance in
January someone petitions within 20 days
we're going to hold off that question
until the November election regardless
of whether or not I mean you don't know
we've waited so long on so many things
what's the difference if somebody wants
to do that and I'm I'm okay it's just
like is are there going to be 21
residents or are there going to be 40
some OD residents come out and um U and
it probably will happen so I probably
shouldn't say it but come out on the dog
ordinance that I mean the litter you
know the way I think it was phrased in
our meeting was dog and litter ordinance
um we haven't drafted it we have talked
to the town attorney but that was the
issue so now if you let's sit there and
say we to do this and we had
um 2% of the residents of the electors
of the town so basically 48 people came
out and said we're not going to accept
this
um I would tell you yeah let's put it on
the November ballot why not I mean why
it's the our town of Andover moves
pretty slow as it is but if it gets past
the 21 the and it's not a 21 day it was
a 45 day because Adrian requested at
additional time and I was okay with
additional time um but if we were to
follow the power of overrule ordinances
with Section B says the selectman shall
call a special referendum be held within
30 days of the certification of so why
not why not say Carol that the ordinance
does not go into effect and gets put on
the next acceptable
ballot it can weit like it's not going
to I I guess we could do that but then
again you could be forcing someone to
wait 11 months to have their question
that theyve
petitioned go on a ballot I but I I
wouldn't we wouldn't put it in effect no
no and I hear what you're saying but the
people who go out and take the time to
get the petition signed are now waiting
11 months
result and I I hear what you're saying I
see you laughing but the thing is is
that we're trying to avoid special
meetings right so a lot of these
ordinances are coming into effect and
people aren't happy with it they could
be petition yeah but but but I think I
thought what I heard Jeff say is that if
you invoked the petition to referendum
and you were successful in getting the
amount you have you say
that puts a stay on that ordinance until
the election so it doesn't go in effect
until the town actually votes on it so
Carol really it it's kind of a good way
I it's kind of taking what kein has and
modifying a
bit I I'm actually giving more authority
to those 45 people that want to sit
there and challenge
this I'm not giving less I'm sitting
there saying hey if you think that this
is a bad decision for the town and you
want to put it forth okay put it forth
and we'll stay it till a general
election Carol if I'm the first Elman
I'm waiting to the budget meeting to put
my ordinance forth anyway so to be
really honest it's gonna sit and just
stay right until there's an organized
meeting so that the town doesn't waste
any money so if you're going to if you
ask if you want to give everybody the
appropr L it's a 45-day wait till be
enacted so let's sit there and say we
pass an ordinance next month right we
have a 45 day
wait till it can go into effect if
someone sits there and gathers the
number of signatures required it would
have to then go on the next ballot and I
might even miss November because I don't
it's not enough time right it could
potentially Miss November to get on the
ballot for referendum I me is the first
as a selectman I'd be okay push it all
the way I want it in place I'm thinking
I'm doing the right thing for the
community but if there's enough
Community backlash I'm not negative to
backlash I I just we got to overcome it
so but but what if we're talking about
an ordinance that has to deal with with
public health and safety you know it
seems trivial but the dog poop in the
park so you guys pass an ordinance
somebody petitions that uh no we don't
want that now we've got to wait until
November that's an awful lot of poop
building up in the meantime so on the
One Hand by not having to go to town
meeting we've streamlined the process
but by the same token if it has to go to
general election now we've slowed it
down again slowed it down one way or the
other so I'm trying to pick the the one
that I think is going to be the least uh
Rocky and I think as long as we don't do
as long as the board of Selectmen does
not do something crazy I don't NE
necessarily think you're going to have
push
back this comes back to what what you're
saying and what Jody says and and you
know a lot of what you see in Washington
at certain times yes our system is
predicated upon people acting rationally
and
honorably that's the only thing we've
done so I I I'm I'm sitting there saying
that I I think
that the Andover Board of Selectmen is
rational and they're not going to put up
anything that's so crazy that there's
going to be an ungodly amount so we have
to have a public hearing so we've
already agreed there's a public hearing
before we it even gets approved then
there would be a 45-day waiting period
to get enacted to allow residents to sit
there and collect enough signatures to
push back against it and then if they
gather the right amount of signatures it
gets pushed off until the next regularly
scheduled election I don't see how more
common sense and fair it could be
I think I think that does a good job of
giving the board of selectman latitude
to act but then has that checks and
balances for the town to say whoa hold
on a second and and I think I think you
know as long as the they act in a way
that 45 people aren't going to get it an
uproar over then you know the common
sense thing like that you know there's
already signs posted don't walk your dog
there um but um so to me it has that
right balance I'm sorry Carol I cut you
off go
ahead I I just I been kind of looking at
other towns Charters and that like minor
ordinance
definitions and there was one that said
to maintain public health and safety
zoning behavior and general welfare and
then they gave examples of they said
noise no remov pet restrict building and
zoning regulations those are just some
that I
notated um after I looked at that so
there is a way if were to Define minor
versus
major they could do that in a general
way like this maybe add a little more
give a few more
examples um but I do agree if
we are going to move forward with
allowing of Select to take that
legislative authority to create the
ordinances we do have to have that
script wait can you send around the Hein
language that sort of has has it going
to town referendum I mean or may maybe
were you going to send that to Jeff and
was he G to updated I can because I
think that's the Safeguard that's the
that's the way that we make sure that as
towns folks that nothing goes you know
that's and I don't I don't think we have
to
um you know the minor and the major are
still just I think even with General
categories I think that's what'll lead
to confusion um it's almost like um you
know ask for a little bit of ask for
forgiveness as opposed to asking for
permission so what we're doing here is
we're giving our town leaders that we've
all elected the ability
to enact Common Sense
ordinance um without asking for
permission right they're not taking it
to town meeting they're they're they're
acting they're doing something um but we
as a town have recourse to say no that's
crazy don't do
that it sounds like we're all in general
consensus with the concept as it's been
discussed and and modified and it sounds
like
there's some additional language that
needs to be put in from what Jeff has
presented today to get this to a a final
concept everybody agree on that so I
still need a little bit of work to do so
Carol you share you share that with me
and and what what I'm taking from the
conversation is
that if someone petitions to go to
referendum and successful with the
numbers within the 45 day time frame
right so we've extended the time frame
because we have a a 21-day time frame
somewhere in our Charter and we're
increasing that to 45 days so we delay
implementation for the 45 days and then
if someone is successful in gathering
the signatures to petition for a town
referendum we hold off implementation
until the referendum vote when that
occurs and and I'm a believer that it
happens at a normal election to to allow
for the M the most I don't want to
special things upset me because like we
call a special meeting or we call a
special Town town meeting or we call a
special referendum they're all added
time added money that that I'm not I'm
not a big proponent of so I would rather
push it all the way to the election and
and delay it so everybody gets their
Fair hearing on it and if the board of
Selectmen wants to put forth a an
ordinance and it gets past the 45 days
then it goes into
effect then it's in effect though so
let's just all be clear it's in effect
people can then after the 45 days
determine that they don't like the
ordinance and petition again but it's in
effect until the next election when it
gets voted on
again right is that fair right is that
Common Sense what I'm explaining so I'll
sit there and go rebuild that Carol if
you share me the the petitioned referend
language I'll sit there and have this
for next meeting so that we can
all okay agree I'll get let me just run
one one additional scenario so the the
board of Selectmen um passes an
ordinance and the town petitions and
says no you know this needs to to go to
referendum the board of Selectmen thinks
that this item needs to be worked on
needs to be acted upon so strongly
they could then withdraw that ordinance
modify
it and perhaps that modified ordinance
now goes into effect and so you don't
have to wait until the election for for
an up or up or down I I I agree with
that I mean I would also think honestly
that that would probably happen at the
public
hearing you know the assumption is that
we're having a public hearing we're
going through all of the steps to try to
get something done so people who are
negative to an ordinance would hopefully
come to the public hearing and give us
their opinion and tell us hey we don't
like this this is what you really need
to be doing and then we would hopefully
write that into our new ordinance so it
would take that issue off the table so
that the resident doesn't try to go out
and get 45 signatures or 48 signatures
so I mean listen nothing happens in a
vacuum the I mean you can't sit there
and get things done on on the board
because you have to have enough votes to
get people to agree to it and if the
community doesn't agree with it we just
need to give them res recourse to sit
there and say hey we don't like what
you're doing and you got to change um so
I have no problem doing that
because I don't sit there and anticipate
putting forth any ordinance that the
members of our board here would sit
there and have a huge problem with
um so I I I have no problem let me do it
let me come back to you guys again I'll
give you the more of the language and
then you guys can sit there and but
review what I've given you already so
that you're familiar with those sections
and we're we're comfortable with what is
changing or would change I shouldn't say
is changing but potentially will change
so great stuff Jeff thank you very
much um
Carol okay I'm ready now Okay so
if we were to decide to vote on the same
day as the ram budget
referendum we would have to move our
dates
up that are in the charter section
802 so what I did because Hein has
already done this I just took language
from their Charter and some of the dates
from their Charter so under Section 802
duties on the
budget we would add no later than
October 15th the board of Finance shall
confer with the board of Selectmen and
the Board of Education to discuss the
goals and objectives for the upcoming
budget the board of Finance may suggest
a Target increase for expenditures for
both The General
government and Board of Education
budgets however the target increases
shall not be binding with respect to
budget
transmittance so that would be sections
802a then if you go down to
802b agency and department heads we
would delete the 120 days and we would
put 15
days and then um the next sentence the
head of each department officer agency
of the Town supported wholly or in part
by Town funds except the regional board
of education and the local Board of
Education shall file with the Town
Administrator a detailed estimate of
expenditures to be made by that
department office or agency and the
revenues other than property taxes be
collected thereby in the ensuing fiscal
year such estimate shall be accompanied
by a statement setting forth the
services activities and work
accomplished during the current year and
plan for accomplishment in the ensuing
fiscal
year the local board of education budget
must be submitted to the board of
Finance by February
15 then section c
we would add duties of the Town
Administrator the Town Administrator
shall review the budget estimates upon
completion of the review and not later
than 120 days prior to the end of the
fiscal year the Town Administrator shall
present to the board of Selectmen and
the board of finance a proposed budget
in preparing the proposed budget the
Town Administrator make comment and make
recommendations on the budget
requests made by various departments
offices and
agents and then we would add section D
where it would say there shall be budget
review meetings in March which shall be
joint meetings of the board of Selectmen
and the board of
Finance where a quum of at least one of
the two boards is required to conduct
business then section e would remain the
same the only thing that we would do is
after the uh first sentence the board of
Finance shall review the budget
estimates with the heads of all Town
supported departments offices and
agencies as needed I would just suggest
that we put in as needed because if the
board of Finance
deems that that review is not necessary
with the heads of the department
they could just move
forward and then if we were to add
section e with a one after it upon
completion of the review and not later
than 85 days prior to the end of the
fiscal year the board of Finance shall
hold a public hearing on their
recommended
budget then we'll keep all the sections
that uh dictate the requirements
that what the proposed budget should
include okay and then everything would
stay the same right
through
uh then when we go to section 803 the
annual Town budget meeting and
referendum instead of being held in one
of the first 10 days we would now put in
the annual town budget meeting shall be
held in the second week of April the
proposed budget shall be the only
substantive met matter presented to the
annual Town budget meeting for adoption
pursuant to the provisions of this
section it is the intent of this Charter
that the provisions of the general
statutes governing Town meetings as
contained in section
7-7 shall not apply to the adoption of
this budget
then if you move down to
803b we would delete the first uh
sentence if a
quorum you know starting with if a Quin
all the way down to adopt or reject the
budget we would remove the first two and
a half
lines and then pick up with the town
meeting May make amendments to the
proposed budget however that the town
meeting shall only have the power to
reduce or modify but not increase the
budget or anything in there and then
keep uh the town meeting may not alter
any specific items contained in the
budget proposed by the local Board
of then we would remove the next line
that says if the budget is
rejected all the way down so it would be
three
and little over three lines and then we
would insert the town meeting sh adjourn
to a referendum to be held on the
Tuesday following the 1st Monday May and
leave in that voting by absentee ballot
at referendum is allowed so and then
basically the remainder of the sections
would just be um so
803d would just be
modified because it talks about the next
town meeting if the budget is
rejected
so just a few of the lines in that would
be removed but
basically um what I've read is the only
way really for us to redo our Charter so
that we are able to vote with the ram
budget
referend and I will send it I just I
don't know how to share my screen so I
will send this over I've highlighted in
yellow what I'm suggesting that we
remove and in red I've added what
language we would put in in its
place that would be helpful for me to
see it so I could I could read it and
ask questions back I don't think I I was
trying to do the the timing in my head I
don't
think any of that really would put any
of the Departments out I don't either I
know it wouldn't affect my department
because the board of Selectmen is asking
Eric to gather that information in
December anyway so we all basically have
a general idea of what's going to be
coming up in the next fiscal year be
able to properly budget for that and let
you know
so so if we're talking about the biggest
change to what we're doing other than
timing for the individuals the
individual departments the biggest
change that we're doing is we're not
asking the town meeting to vote the
budget up or down we're asking the town
meeting to make recommendations for any
adjustments down that they believe they
want and if the town meeting approves
those Downs that's the budget that goes
to referendum
correct because that's the only way to
do that because if we were to allow the
town meeting to not send that budget
forward to referendum we would not be
able to meet that uh statutory
requirement for the ram referendum okay
so so just as we all think about this
what we're doing
is we're allowing the individuals at the
town meeting to come and and uh evaluate
and make recommendations especially
downward recommendations you know that's
what they're allowed to do right now
anyway at our annual bug and and those
downward recom recommendations if are if
they are approved become part of the
budget that ends up at referendum and so
now we're moving the up and down vote
from the the town meeting to town
referendum so we're giving a bigger pool
of individuals the opportunity to vote
on that budget that is correct
okay I don't have any problem with it I
mean I'd like to see it written so I
could understand what we're the language
we're trying to change and how we would
get this to the town attorney but I I
don't have a problem with it I will send
that out and I can forward this over to
Dennis to so he can I we would want him
to do that anyway just to make sure that
I'm not omitting anything that legally
we have to have in there
m all right so it sounds like this is
kind of in the same boat as uh what what
Jeff did um you'll circulate it around
we can all look at it we can bring it
back to the floor next week and
hopefully put it to bed at that
point
okay
um well I think I'm up at this
point
um not having a first Selectmen elected
and instead have a
chairperson like in the board of
Selectmen like in the Board of Education
Board of Finance so I went back and
spent a little bit more time looking at
the Connecticut General statutes which
uh put me to sleep several times um it's
quite a mind-numbing set of documents
but I didn't find anything in there that
really jumped off the page now granted
I'm an electrical engineer I'm not a
lawyer I'm not a professional Statesman
um but what I ended up doing was going
back to
the uh the charter as we have now and
I'm going to share my screen
here um so you can all see what I did
here okay are you all getting
that you see the charter over here on
the
uh right here that I'm moving around
yeah we see it on the right side yeah
okay well it looks like I just minimized
a whole bunch of other documents so it
should just be that one document okay
let me make a big actually that doesn't
really help um so I'm going to start up
at the top so I just did a search for
first selectman and it appears 27 times
in the document and I just wanted to
here let me just start right from the
top and obviously there's a chapter on
it um the first place that it's
mentioned is in town officers general
election so we would take
out one of whom shall be a designated
nominee for the office of first
selectman a political party May nominate
no more than four members this was the
discussion that we had last week if
we're going to take this out so that's
no well no no I wasn't in favor of it I
researched
it so still leave it at
three yes we didn't make yes okay unless
someone wanted the motion make a Rec a
motion for it I would leave it at three
yeah all right I I was I like I'm
following your method you want to
understand what are the ramifications of
CH select just went went through the
document so we'll just leave it at three
okay political party May nominate no
more than three members and we strike
the language of the designated nominee
for the office of first
selectman okay moving
forward um this town meeting procedure
there's still Court called to order by
the first selectman or vice verse
selectman that doesn't really need to
change again in Bob you would just
change the name right you would call it
the would there still be a first
selectman or would it called chairperson
of no there's there's enough language in
the general statutes that I think we
would leave it as the first selectman
because there are still duties that that
individual duties and responsibilities
that that person has essentially we're
just we're not making it elected we're
making it appointed by the board of
Selectmen right that's what I you know
the homework that I wanted to do was are
we gonna run a foul of the the general
statutes by by doing this and I didn't
really see anything that that jumped off
the page so let me just keep keep going
through this so you know Town meetings
calling to order the first selectman
blah blah blah so that's just some
procedures there
whoops um what did I just close
there
review new uh navigation pan here we go
click the wrong button there so
hang
on all
right
um this is again just stuff that happens
in the town meeting where the first
selectman is really just in a moderator
capacity um this talks about the general
the board of Selectmen and how pre prior
to this the board by a majority vote
would select the vice first selectman
while we add a first selectman and a
vice first selectman by majority vote
and again just a little change in
language here these positions such
positions etc
etc moving
forward public
emergencies uh the Town Administrator or
the first
selectman uh can deputize people summon
Marshall etc etc and this is the first
Selectmen acting in their capacity as
chief of police um and again what does
it say in the the general statutes well
there are some towns that have appointed
Chiefs of police as well as elected ones
so there's no real loss of applicability
there
um we go to chapter five that talks
specifically about the first selectman
we strike the first selectman shall be
the chief elected officer of the town
since he's no longer the chief elect
officer but remains a voting and
participating member of the board and an
ex officio member of the other Town
commission's boards and agencies so
there the first selectman doesn't vote
on these other agencies boards but can
attend their meetings and speak up um
except as otherwise provided by the
charter she'll have all the powers
duties and responsibilities conferred by
law again this doesn't really change
except it's an appointed versus a
separately elected
position um
let me see so here now this is something
I just kind of Applied my own judgment
um this talks
about uh the town attorney he shall upon
written request of the first selectman
or Board of Selectmen well I struck
first Selectmen and I just left Board of
Selectmen it seems to me um do we want
to leave the First selectman with the
independent authority to Marshall the
town uh attorney and uh forward things
you know questions of Law and whatnot or
should that just be at the request of
the board of
Selectmen I don't really know what do
you think
Jeff unmute
yourself you're probably gonna have to
leave that one
because
um while currently we have a town
attorney that is extremely flexible
we're not going to always have that town
attorney and if you give the Authority
for every member to be able to
communicate um causes a causes a problem
well I think when we say upon written
request of the board of
Selectmen maybe it needs additional
language upon a written request of a
majority of the board of Selectmen so it
requires consensus
let the attorney sit there and and and
weigh in on that one okay I mean he's
going to look at all this stuff also so
all right we'll leave that as it as it
stands for the attorney's
feedback um and again I don't think
there are any other changes in here I
just have you know the the search
located the places where first selectman
appears and I don't think it really
changes the rights responsibilities or
actions here um checks shall be signed
by the Town Administrator and the
absence or inability of the Town
Administrator the first selectman shall
act for the Town Administrator should
that be the Town Administrator should it
be the town clerk
Carol any thoughts on
that and I'm
sorry for
Bing yeah for
selecting I'm just throwing out ideas
here since checks it's check signing
Carol does not want that car no I I
don't I I mean I I will do that if if
you need me to I mean
that's I don't have that right now and
I'm just asking what makes the most
sense I leave it as it is we leave it as
it
is I mean I am in the building so if
it's good for the town I don't mind
signing checks why don't you why don't
you we have a financial officer in town
we do a town Treasurer and a town
finance individual right we have lots of
people that could potentially do this
but the problem is I think when they're
writing the checks they don't want to be
the signer so that's problem because it
used to be I think it was you Jeff and
then Adrian was also a signer so there
was another member of board of Selectmen
who could sign we had the vice versa
been sign right so is Jeff currently a
signer too or no I don't believe that he
got put on the the card I think I'm I'm
it with uh right now it's myself Eric
and the superintendent of
schools just keep going you can sure we
can sit adding device for Selectmen yeah
obviously um okay resignations
copy forwarded to the first selectman
and the chairman of said agency I don't
see any reason to change
that
um uh the okay this is the transition
stuff from
1999 we leave that language in here uh
and what I've added here is a new
section two at the regular municipal
election to be held in November 2027
there shall be elected five members for
a term of four years the prior practice
for separately electing a first
selectman shall be discontinued at this
time so that's just uh like the prior
transition language when the charter was
enacted this just supersedes what was
there we could take out what was there
we could leave it there for historical
purposes I say let's just leave it there
um I just asked you to back up to the
resignation
part
case okay yeah so it says said
resignation shall become effective upon
acceptance by the vote of the board of
Selectmen that has absolutely nothing to
do with someone's
resignation the minute that they sign it
and they turn it in here to the town
clerk's office that's the date of their
resignation so I I just I I don't know
why that's in there
because if je wanted to resign tomorrow
he doesn't care if the rest of the board
of
Selectmen accepts it or not his
resignation is effective the day he
tells me or tells the town it's
effective in his
letter of resignation can I do that no
but I'm just
saying I'm just saying that is what
happens it is immediately when you bring
it in here and it's stamp
in all right well you see what I just
did
here said resignation shall become
effective upon receipt by the town
clerk's
office thank you that's the law that's
not me but
that's
immediately
okay I don't I don't know if it's
effective immediately it's like someone
could resign
right so it's based on the resignation
letter or whatever right it's effective
the date stated in the resignation
letter so we get rid of the entire
language
yeah when in doubt don't have it
yeah all
right uh moving forward on first
selectman
uh resignation by town clerk shall be
filled with the first
Selectmen that
is bring that res
to not not to the Town Administrator
no the first select
okay is that state low
also I will check the statute but we do
um we need to change like Jeff was
saying some of spelling errors yeah did
we first select
man uhhuh
we also need to uh highlight 101
resignations make it
invold that's what this bar right here
is I'm doing markup within word okay
anybody who works with word understands
that this is a change here and that's
it's automatically doing these
strikeouts and changing the the font and
everything right right what I'm saying
is up above section 10:9 savings clause
that's bold so section 1010 resignations
should say bold oh all in bold that's
just yeah okay a formatting change I got
you okay sorry about
that no format's important
also all right moving forward here
first to the first select man yeah first
selector but
whatever
um wait wait wait we I'm sorry we're
changing
that
what
selectman it was me it was men plural ah
got thank you okay thank you appreciate
that yeah it's subtle but important I
understand yeah thank you
okay uh right this we were we were at
this right we covered that um that's it
bob where was their language that
described the process of the board of
Selectmen selecting
the first Selectmen was that in there
yes I'll find it okay so under
chapter 4 Board of
Selectmen
403 the prior procedure was at the first
meeting you know following the town
election the board of Selectmen shall
fix a time and place of its regular
meeting at this meeting the board by a
majority vote of the entire membership
shall select a it just was vice ver
selectman and I added first selectman
and a so that it's both both positions
thank you and then there's some
additional language here that basically
says if they can't do it at that meeting
they got to do it at the next meeting
and again made it more inclusive to to
show both positions and is it implied or
do we need to specify that that first
selectman is one of
the elected
Selectmen I think the prior language in
here says that the first selectman is
a an elected
member um yeah I would just wanted to be
clear that you know the the the five
people couldn't say oh well let's put
someone else in or something funky like
that yeah you know it might have been
something that was covered by the fact
one of whom shall be the designated
nominee of the office of the first
selectman um and when we remove that
then the implication that you're talking
about kind of goes away also I mean
that's a subtle point but I think it's
important um yeah I was just reflecting
on National politics and speak of the
house and they anybody could be speaker
of the house right which kind of weird
right and so I was like I want to make
sure it's one of the five were appointed
I mean sorry elected of the five similar
to I think how you the the Board of Ed
probably has something like
that or maybe it doesn't right that's
how the Board of Ed Works in town and
board of Finance so I don't it's easy
right here okay from
the
board's
elected
membership
membership you know that's that's one
way to put that language in there works
for me thanks Bob yeah and we'll see
what Dennis does with that language okay
ask one question on that I know Jody
that you had said keep it at three so
basically
what we're doing is still only giving
the electors six people to vote for and
the only thing that we're doing is we're
removing the first selectman race
because currently the way our
Charters is that the candidate who was
not elected as first selectman would
then be thrown into the pool of four Bo
of Select so we're
still limiting
the electors in town you know our voters
in town to the same number six people
and I'm just curious why you wouldn't
want to increase that amount give our
voters or candidates to vote for rather
than restricting and limiting just to
the same six that they currently are
able to vote for so
Carol um we're Li liting the number that
can be nominated by each of the two
major parties okay somebody can always
as many people as you want could could
petition and run as Independents
couldn't they they can still do that now
but what I'm saying is if our Charter is
still restricting just to the same
six the same number of candidates the
only thing is we're just eliminating the
office of first select St strip strip
the number of of people that can be put
up out totally and they'll put up
three so go ahead it it's it only makes
sense from a political standpoint that
you can eliminate the the number
of of candidates from each party like
they can put up 10 if they'd like well
they would have to go by Statute then
Jeff I mean by the election rules not
statute but election rules as to the
number of candidates that they about so
like if there's four seats up on the
board of Finance each party can put up
four
candidates the only one that that
doesn't apply to is the restrictive
voting on our local Board of Education
where each party can put up
two well I think that's why they're
doing it it was done originally and I I
will tell you what Jody's logic when jod
I read reread Jody's information on it
and he asked the question why would any
party put up more than three people when
the maximum number of of your
representative total can only be three
so if you put up four you're then
deluding your vote to your total so you
can get rid of the number and and that's
okay and then a party can put up four or
five but they're really not going to do
it because if if a party puts up five
and dutes its vote and what's going to
happen is it's only going to get two
members on the board and the goal is for
each one of these parties they what they
want but they're not deluding to vote
because the number that each political
party is allowed to put on the ballot is
the number that the elector can vote
well if they're going to vote for you
they're going to vote for you any we're
just giving the
extra see what I'm saying so it is not
deluding vote the only thing that could
potentially happen is if all if if the
Democrats put up five candidates and all
five are the top vote gets they will not
be seated the three top vote Getters
will be seated and the two top vote
getting Republic an would then be seen
because of the minority
representation uh requirement of our
Charter you didn't have that Minority
rep it could be four in one based on
statute minority and what I'm saying is
if you feel that it's it's it's
appropriate to give a party the more
opportunity to put
more people up for a position and the
selectman eliminate the total you can
put up 10 people if it would fit on the
ballot and statutorily we could get away
with it go ahead or just leave it
without no more the political leave that
sentence out so that the political party
just can nominate the number that
elections allow
them Carol when you when people vote
they can make three selections
correct is that right no first SE first
SE I'm sorry we're restricting that by
saying that each party can nominate no
more than three so we're restricting
that in our Charter to the three and
just for example Board of Finance each
party at our major municipal
can nominate four members four
candidates so electors can vote for four
people so if you're eliminating the
number restriction in our
Charter as to the number that they can
nominate the number that the political
party can nominate is the number that
the elector can vote got it so your your
suggesting
[Music]
that let's say we make it four we
increase it I walk into that Ballot
Box I could put the four across on the
Republican or four across on the
Democrat but really
the
top five vote
Getters across all of them are going to
be it and no but no but no I'm sorry the
uh there can only be three from one
party as a majority and two from could
be any other
party okay so you're suggesting for but
I guess I still see I I like Jeff's
suggestion that we just eliminate that
sentence and we don't restrict and how
many and then how many do you have
people vote for when they walk in they
vote for the same number that the
political party can nominate so if what
if one party puts up four and one party
puts up three what would you
do they did an under endorsement because
if if when I get the list and I send it
out to the town committee chair they
have to send me the number of candidates
that they're indorse it if there are
five spaces open and they do not
nominate five candidates that's an under
endorsement on their part there's
nothing that we can do about that but
they have the option to nominate five
candidates and give the voters of
Handover those 10 people okay to El but
but what you're suggesting Carol is
is is changing the number because what
Jody asked before was how many how many
candidates can you vote for at an
election and currently you get to put
one vote on the first selectman line so
those two candidates there's one one to
one and then when you get down to the
other candidates that are running just
for the select board currently you can
only vote for
two so it's three okay yeah
right so so that's the current
situation What car what Carol is saying
is she' say you vote for five
and you put up whatever candidate you
want but that's what I think that's what
you're trying to okay you're trying that
is what I'm saying because then it would
be
um state law as to how many we'd be able
to vote rather than restrip not only how
many we could vote for but also the
number that political
party so so what you're asking what
you're asking is for every resident to
vote for all of the members of the board
that they want to have elected all of
them right because if we are eliminating
the office of
person which it sounds like everyone is
in favor of doing that no we've never
voted on that I'm just no no but I'm
saying it sounds the idea that that's
the idea that's out there is what I'm
saying okay so if we were keeping the
office of first select and then one
would run against the other and whoever
was not elected just would be out of the
race and then if we were keeping it that
way and then I'm just suggesting to
allow the to remove that line and just
allow political parties to put up four
candidates for Board of select one for
first sment or for Board of Select so
then there's more options out there for
the voter if we decide to eliminate the
office of first selectman and just do
Board of Selectmen select board whatever
we're going to call them um group then
gives the electors the right oh our
political parties to put up their five
people and our electors to vote for the
five that they
want but you're still having a
five-person board with the majority of
one party only being three is that is
that in the in your scenario I I'm not I
haven't even gone over there as far as
the minority rep because again our
Charter
increases minority rep requirement on
our Board of Selectmen and our local
Board of
Education I'm not suggesting anything
about that at this point if the charter
review commission wants to look at that
and so assume assume those I guess I'm
just trying to play your scenario so you
say assume those are still in play with
a political party can put up
five the voter can pick
five and the minority representation
still holds okay right because that's
happened on other boards Jody because if
the makeup of a board is of a five
member board um there's two candidates
that are up when in our upcoming 2025
election okay so let's say that each
party puts up two candidates but right
now the makeup of that board is three
Republicans and let's say that the two
Republicans in the 2025 election are the
top vote get one of those will not be
seated due to the minority
representation requirements so the
lowest vote getting Republican will not
be seated the top vote getting Democrat
will be
because minority rep comes into play and
this has happened in the past where
someone who is receives the most votes
at the election is not seated because
minority
rep and again just working through the
possibilities if it's three and three
for five positions then basically just
the one person who gets the least amount
of votes doesn't get elected and you're
always going to have three of one party
and two of the
other right unless there's a third party
candidate potentially right right
there's three of one maximum of one
party but then if they are a petitioning
candidate and they are a registered
Republican they are Republican minority
they're unaffiliated or a minor
party that's when there's a
differ well one of the
ongoing points of discussion is that as
it stands now we have trouble finding
enough people for there to be a
competitive election so I don't know
that increasing the number of allowed
candidates for each party really changes
anything can I can I just tell you this
I when people have been coming into my
office since we started this new Charter
revision because that's what I've been
hearing a lot is that we can't get
people and this we put out on our
Facebook page we sent a text we sent
people who sign up for the different
emergencies we let them know about this
we had 14 people sign up for this board
Commission
we had a number of people signing up
wanting to be on the field committee the
the boards and commissions that we put
that information out there to people and
we tell them how to go about getting
their name on the list to be on there
they come forward I have been just
asking people as they come into my
office since we started this I ask them
if they mind my asking them a question
and maybe putting them on the spot spot
and I asked how would you go about if
you wanted to be on the board of
education or the board of Finance or you
want to be the talent flirt how would
you go about doing
that and I have not had one person who
knew how to do that and and it's it's
just people don't understand there's a
process there's a time frame you have to
talk to your respective Town committee
if you're unaffiliated go to both Town
committees and ask them for the
endorsement but people honestly don't
know so if we were to put an effort in
there with in our town resources to get
this information we get everything out
to the people why can't we do that send
that out hey there's a municipal
election coming up in 2025 we're going
to be filling three seats on our Board
of Finance we're going to be filling two
seats on our local uh sorry three seats
on our local Board of Education we're
going to be filling two seats on our
Fire Commission two on planning and Zing
you know get that information out if you
would like to be on the ballot these are
the ways that you do it the Democratic
town committee is having their cus on
this date Republican Town committee on
this date call the respective Town chair
and ask where it's at you know if you
need any
information and go out there I I do
think we'd have more people interested
if they understood the process and the
deadlines thank you that's all very
useful very relevant stuff um can we
circle around to the the subject at hand
here and try to come to some sort of
conclusion on it um three
four leave it at
three no I think Carol's I I think
Carol's point is valid just eliminate
the number any party can put up what
they want I am telling you I mean Carol
just from my standpoint the Republicans
and the Democrats are going to put up
what will make the most sense
mathematically for them to get people
positioned on the
boards but I agree with you now the the
bigger question is is eliminate the
number of candidates right eliminate the
number of candidates how many people can
you vote for is a bigger question Carol
yeah that dictates how many how many
party will put up check on that um
additionally it is the number of seats
that are available are the number that
the party can nominate and that the
elector can vote for okay so so let's
just let's just say we we we let's sit
there and
say we kept what we're currently doing
that means means that would mean that
the first selectman candidates would run
against each other and there would only
be one vote for that seat and then the
current process would mean that for the
SE rest of the select board you'd have
four votes not two that you currently
have right right
okay I'm I'm just telling you if if
that's how it would
go I would support that so if you had
five let's sit there and say for some
reason and somehow the fir elimination
of the first Selectmen occurred you
would then have five votes for the
select
board and the parties could put up
whatever number of candidates they
wanted but we would still have a three
to2 split the majority party could only
have three
members right if the charter stays like
that with the minority rep but um
they the party could still only put up
you know their the maximum number
allowed but if they
under and so it would be the three
highest vote Getters from
one you'd look at the five highest vote
well actually I don't know how you do
you just you just rank it you rank it
one through five and if four of the
members are from one party you take the
sixth person and bring them in it
happened in 2014
okay that was a really odd election
because we had two petitioning people we
had a lot of people running
so okay well I re-shared I just struck
the whole thing if you know I mean
striking the number of potential
candidates they can put up doesn't do
anything to the parties it gives it
gives potentially us options to get more
candidates but in my head I'm thinking
the
individual parties are only going to put
up what mathematically makes sense to
them which is what Jody said in his
original piece but if you strike it it
allows them it allows Carol and the town
to go forward and say hey run and um you
know get on the ballot which I'm all for
I and I'm not opposed to it either
striking it I think the so then the then
the question is you were asking them to
pick
five and
so it adds a interesting Dynamic I mean
I guess if you're a political
party you're probably going to want to
have well you could want you could say I
want five on the ballot because I want
everyone in my party to be able to not
cross Vote or you could say I only want
three because I want my party
to um you know concentrate the vote
there's a level
of gamesmanship there's a level of
strategy that I think comes into play
that doesn't happen today and if that's
if that's our intent you could tell your
your your party vote for the three
strongest Democrats and the two weakest
Republicans you know or you know it's
there's a lot of different strategies
that could that could come into play and
if that is the strategy of a party they
can under endorse and only put up their
three candidates but you don't know
who's going to be most popular with to
vote you might think someone's a really
strong
candidate they don't make it at so you
know it's it's interesting how things
turn out that's all I'm I mean I mean
the listen just for
me if the if the first seleman race was
and let's I'm just sitting there with
what we're currently dealing with so
speak to what you're dealing with right
now Bob and trying to go through if the
first Selman was was win or take all you
would see different things happen in our
town if you just make the first San race
win or take all then it becomes very
different because that first person
normally gets thrown back into the pool
and normally the elections are close
enough that that person has a greater
mathematical chance of getting a seat
than someone running for the straight
election what do you mean winner take
call uh if the first selectman race is
is you know the winner is the first
selectman and the loser is not on the
board of selectman and has no chance to
get thrown back into the pool then it
really does it would clean up a lot of
what has happened in the past within our
town I mean I'm just saying that's
that's the truth you know so you now as
a now as a as a party you have to
determine if you're putting your best
candidate
up running for first selectman when they
may lose and then they're out because
right now like
um uh it happened in this cycle uh an
cre and the Democrats got voted very
heavily for Anne cre and she got she got
a lot of votes and um you know Adrian
and I ran for first Selectmen and Adrian
lost by more votes and he was not you
know he did not continue on the board of
Selectmen he didn't get enough votes he
didn't get enough votes now if Adrien
had had been in the pool for the
selectman he he may have gotten enough
votes
so to
me I don't mind Carol's proposal of
eliminating the number that they can put
up I tell Carol I would go to Carol and
I would go if I was advising and the
Republicans or the Democrats I would
tell them you really got to do the math
to understand how many people you can
get and who you want to get on and what
you want to do
um so but if you
eliminate the pool opportunity for the
first selectman candidate you you would
clean up a lot of problems within the
town but but you're so I think you know
Adrien I think had suggested that we
last time we we we settle that first whe
are we are we moving to the sort of
first being that you know um appointed
from
the board of Select I have told I have
told the whole group I'm not in favor of
this and there's a reason I'm not in
favor of it because we're not a seven
member board as a five member board it's
much more difficult and I can give you a
just a plain example the board of
education is a seven- member board and
they elected a a new
chairperson there's there's the ability
to to to make decisions on a seven
member board that are different from a
from a three- member board and it's just
my opinion I would I do not want to sit
there and see this on the board of
selecting with a five member I was the
one who who brought it up because I
would have done this at a Town Council
with a seven member board because it
makes sense and you have off elections
you have you have a a four and a three
and so there's always new people coming
in there's new potentially new people
going out it works on that type of board
I really don't think it's the right
thing to do on a five member board when
all five are running at the same time
that's just my opinion um you guys can
put it up and as I've been saying it's
got to get to the board of Selectmen and
it's got to get voted on by the board of
Selectmen
and I'm going to vote no there
too I see V both sides to it because we
have a lot of five member boards that
vote for their chairman our Fire
Commission um even appointed boards like
the
library
Recreation you know and none of them and
none of them are the the lead
organization within the town and have
the
the the issues in front of them that the
town does and there's a you know Carol
for recre commission when we when we
appoint it you know yes you appoint your
chairperson and and I have no problem
with those because you're not electing
you're not potentially electing the
chairperson for that Committee in the
board of Selectmen we're currently
electing the chairperson for that
committee so I I mean that's just my
opinion Jeff I don't understand why five
versus seven why help I'm sorry I I
missed your your point you're saying if
it was a seven-person board
even if it wasn't a combined my sense is
you think the number seven is important
versus a five person well on the seven
member boards that we currently have in
town we have off elections so four
members are coming in in one cycle two
years and then three the next twoyear
cycle and so electing or appointing that
chairperson makes sense to me but also
Jody there's there's an extra two
people if there's five people on a board
to to gather the three necessary votes
um are a lot easier than to gather that
extra vote that you need on a seven
person I'm just saying that's just my
opinion how I sit there and look at it
um and what will end up happening every
time is that the the party uh at least
in the board of Selectmen the party with
um primarily the party that wins the
three the three members will pick one of
their members for the board they may not
pick the best person for the board
they're going to pick the best out of
their three and that's how it currently
works
so um I recommended it I I would
recommend it for a seven member board if
you made the board of selectman seven
members and you made four members run
one period and three members run another
period I would do it um but that's why I
was trying to go to the Town Council
because you could shrink the total
number that we're currently trying to to
get to run
of 12 down to seven so you're Li you're
you're merging five seats you're taking
five people qualified people and you're
hoping to get uh an election of of
qualified people and the biggest thing
in our town is just having smart Common
Sense people in these positions and
um I'm just I'm against it Jody so you
may you may sit there and think a five
member group can do it easily but
there's so much politics in everything
we do even in this even in a small board
and the way that we're running currently
they're still politics oh i' I've felt
it personally so I know what you're
describing so Jeff think a seven person
like what I wanted to have happen would
have happened so I do know what you mean
so Jeff Town Council
notwithstanding would you be in favor of
a seveners board of Selectmen staggered
terms with uh with a an an you know
chosen internally first selectman
no because um and the reason I wouldn't
is one it's you're just adding more
layers of people and I know what Carol's
saying people would run and um it it's
just not what I've seen
occur out there and on the same note
with the first s in giving the voters
you know 300 400 people the option to
vote they want as first
leftman versus a board now I don't know
that I honestly think that people are
just going to say OG gee I'm a
republican I'm going to vote a
republican because there's three of us
on the board or vice versa I'm a
Democrat I'm GNA vote for the Democrat
because there's three of us on the board
I don't think we've seen that on any of
our boards I know
pnz when they're sitting there I I think
that people don't always vote party
lines like that so so I do think that
let's go back to
2014 and the situation that we're in
before I
ran and you know and I know I spent four
years on that board and I got zero
accomplished because of the group of
people I had on that board so I I I'm
telling you it's politics Carol you you
know it you live it you've dealt with it
and it's it's not going to change and
and I the only way to do it is to sit
there and and in my head have a bigger
board and change the type of government
we have because then you'll get really
good c i I believe I would believe you
would get really good candidates as best
you possibly can because you take the
best people running on the board of
finance and the best people running on
the board of Selectmen and you get more
people to come in because it would would
just be a an open race um
so okay we' we've kind of talked this
one to death and it's all great stuff um
I'm gonna take the stuff that I've done
in the marked up Charter here condense
it down to something that I can send to
jod and that'll get circulated around so
we can all look at it concisely uh again
like the other things I'm going to stop
sharing here if that's okay not just
sending it to me send it to everybody B
yeah
okay um and then I know Carol you have
that
individual I'm sorry I forget the the
town clerk person not town clerk um I'm
sorry petition the petition for the
ordinances I'll send that out and
mine I'll send my copy I don't know how
no there's an individual that's can help
us put packet together I forgot that
person's name in town office ER
support person right so Kate can do that
but what I can do as an attachment is
just I know what you're saying about the
packet but I can send this over to you
when our meeting is done just where I
the changes that I read off because I've
highlighted what should be taken out and
in red is what
would so I can send that over to you and
then ask Kate to create a packet for our
next meeting is that what you're asking
me to do too yeah yeah so like Jeff Jeff
has a a host sent something out and he's
going to add some more to it you're
you're you know um you know Bob has a
potential here with the
first selectman changes and that's
something for us all to review so I you
know there should be some level of a how
you know these aren't none of these like
I think we put it in the minutes when we
we all approved them right so I don't
think these these would go in the
minutes but they should unless you just
want to keep emailing but I thought
Adrian had suggested we we create some
sort of packet for review yeah an
attachment would be would be appropriate
like it's done with a lot of other uh
commissions and Boards okay okay and
Carol I want to talk with you tomorrow
about um just some of the mechanics of
how these documents are are put together
I think I have a way to do it that might
make it a little bit uh a little bit
higher quality a little bit better thank
you yeah so some of the stuff you can do
within word and and PDFs okay okay thank
you I think we have covered all of the
things that we intended to cover this
week the things that we talked about
last week and deferred it's unfortunate
that that Adrien isn't with us because
he had a couple of uh important items
you know interesting and important but
we'll just pray for his recovery and um
at this point it looks like we move on
to the second public
speak and we have Leanne Hutchinson
Leanne do you have anything you'd like
to
say yes thank you um I was on earlier I
called in in a different phone number
and so that was me I could hear you and
I thought I unmuted myself but I don't
think you could hear me identify myself
at the time and then I've called in
again on a different phone number um so
there's a couple of things that I may
have missed the beginning of some of
your discussion but I can you speak a
little louder lean oh do you want me to
start over or just is that better that's
good okay you had a couple of items you
wanted to bring
up yes
um
mainly I just wanted to mention
something because it would not be part
of what this committee is going to
discuss this time around but just for
future reference if there is another
Charter Review Committee whatever that
may be and I don't know how many more
meetings you you all are going to have
um it's I participated in the process
back when we first instituted the
charter in town and I've never thought
that it was a good idea to have these
four-year terms I'm just giving this as
a topic as I said possibly for the
future um I don't think it's really
appropriate to have four-year terms
when our state representative our state
senator and our Congress person um
currently Joe Courtney all Ser for only
two years and I think it's just too
lengthy and it's almost a bit
presumptuous if you see what I mean to
have anybody in power for that long and
the first argument that usually comes up
is well commission members board members
like to finish what they started which
makes sense but that's true of any
office holder so um just you know it's
always been my opinion that this is
probably not the best way to do things
to have terms that are twice as long as
elected officials you know higher
elected officials local and um Regional
such as I just mentioned that's all
thank
you lean can I I I I know public speak
isn't supposed to be back and forth but
i' i' just like to add something uh to
to what you just said just just you and
I have a good dialogue you and I both
work together on Planning and Zoning
that comes to mind as does the board of
Finance as does the the Board of
Education these are all boards with kind
of a steep learning curve and a lot of
material to learn in order to become
good at uh an effective in that position
so uh you know I don't know that two
years is enough just my two two cents
worth well I I I know there is a
learning curve and and in a way that's a
good thing because it's almost like a
you know a a job where with many
people's jobs there are things that you
do every day that you learn to do right
away and then there are things that come
up that are just you know one-time
things or things of varying importance
um but again I just refer to um the the
idea that we currently have two-year
terms for state representative state
senator and our Congress person who
cover you know respectively a lot more
constituents than we do in a town like
this so maybe you know with three-year
terms would be advisable or you know
it's come up in a different context
about staggering terms um and we don't
have that right now for at least for the
board of Selectmen so again that's just
a thought and that's why I feel that
this might not be the best way to go
maybe three years would be better down
line at some
point certainly food for thought thank
you for that
input attorney
Lowden yes thank you um real quickly
just based on what you just discussed I
absolutely agree that given the very
steep learning curve two years is
insufficient um and I think we would
need to stick with four years just to
stay on the election cycle so I don't
know that adding a whole other election
at a third year would be a good idea and
the only other
um input I have for right now is I've
been giving it a lot of thought about
having a seven-person board of Selectmen
um based on what you know Jeff was
offering for the Town Council I
understand what happened there um but I
have personally experien the benefit of
staggered terms on a seven-person board
for the last nine years and I think
given the importance of our Board of
Selectmen um that would be a really good
idea to have people um every two years
who have experience and can educate the
people who are coming on as to uh what a
budget looks like how how a budget is
formulated what our ordinances just
everything that the board of Selectmen
and I I don't mean to to uh down
downplay it or what not but everything
that they have to deal with I think it
would be a great idea to have a
seven-person board um and I agree with
Carol that we could get people to run um
I just I've seen it in the last two
committees that we asked for people to
um to apply for and I agree with Carol
that if we tell people better how to do
it we might actually get a lot more
people um to run for things and we're
trying to do that on the DTC thanks a
lot for all your
work thank you
Shannon any uh public speak from the
members of the commission any
independent
things going once Jeff you look like you
wanted to say
something I'll make a motion to adjourn
I second that okay all in favor I I
opposed I'm not opposed thank you one
and all all right see you guys